create structs/interfaces decision doc (#3)
hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework: docs/design/structs-interfaces.md

}

type Validater interface {
  Validate(context.Context, tftypes.Value) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
}

type CustomPlanner interface {
  ModifyPlan(ctx context.Context, priorState, proposedState, config tftypes.Value) (tftypes.Value, []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic)
}
```

### Alternative 3: Mix of structs and interfaces

Example framework implementation:

```go
type Provider struct {
	Resources     map[string]Resource
	ConfigureFunc func(context.Context, *tfprotov5.ConfigureProviderRequest, *tfprotov5.ConfigureProviderResponse, *ProviderState)
}

type Resource struct {
	Schema                *tfprotov5.Schema
	Implementation        func(p ProviderState) ResourceImplementation
	ImplementationContext func(p ProviderState) ResourceImplementationContext
}

// ResourceImplementation defines the methods of this resource.
type ResourceImplementation interface {
	Create(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Read(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Update(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Destroy(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
}
```

## Tradeoffs

### Runtime state

This section concerns stateful data generated during the lifecycle of the provider, not Terraform state.

> For example, consider the `meta` parameter in the CRUD functions of [`helper/schema#Resource`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/schema#Resource), which is conventionally used by providers to store a configured API client. Since it is sent to the provider via the `ConfigureProvider` RPC call without a way for the provider to specify a schema for this data, it cannot be strongly typed and is represented as `interface{}`. Its type must be asserted at the top of each CRUD method where it is used.

Author: It seems that every way we've worded this so far has been confusing! I've tried again to resolve it with your very helpful _framework-owned vs provider-owned_ distinction.

#### Structs

If providers, resources, and data sources are represented as structs in framework code, provider code will instantiate values of those structs. 

Certain struct fields could be populated by the framework: for `Resource`, this could include `ProviderMeta` and `TerraformVersion`. Provider code cannot add additional struct fields to store strongly-typed data. This lack of flexibility is a **disadvantage**, although it likely also prevents some anti-patterns.

An abandoned idea involved storing `Config` and `State` on the resource struct. This approach seems strictly worse than including config and state values in CRUD function request and response objects (e.g. `ResourceCreateRequest`), since it would be unclear when and how the framework modified those values.

> #### Interfaces

Reviewer: One bit I think is missing from here is an acknowledgement of the disadvantage: data is strongly-typed, but that comes at the cost of needing to be _explicit_. Every bit of runtime state the framework wants to track needs to be explicitly communicated to these types, for example, `TerraformVersion`.

This can be set when the struct is created, by passing arguments to the factory:

```go
func NewComputeInstance(data framework.RuntimeState) Resource {
  return computeInstance{
    terraformVersion: data.TerraformVersion,
    client: data.ConfigureProviderData.(*Client),
  }
}
```

or it can be set with explicit methods:

```go
type computeInstanceResource struct {
  terraformVersion string
  client *Client
}

func (c *computeInstanceResource) SetTerraformVersion(version string) {
  c.terraformVersion = version
}

func (c *computeInstanceResource) SetConfigureProviderData(data framework.ConfigureProviderData) {
  c.client = data.(*Client)
}
```

It's also worth noting that helpers controlled by the framework may want access to this information (for example, tfhttp is the main audience of the TerraformVersion information, to include it in the User-Agent). This implies the necessity of a mechanism for the framework to retrieve this information. On framework-controlled structs, this is easy--it just accesses the property. On provider-controlled implementations of an interface, it needs to be accounted for with something like a getter:

```go
type computeInstanceResource struct {
  terraformVersion string
}

func (c computeInstanceResource) GetTerraformVersion() string {
  return c.terraformVersion
}
```

It may be worth calling out, though, that we could provide a framework-controlled struct providers are required to embed in their interface implementations (we can enforce this at compile time by requiring an unexported method to be implemented) that would hide this from provider developers entirely:

```go
type computeInstanceResource
  framework.RuntimeData
}
```

that would be implemented in the framework as

```go
type RuntimeData struct {
  terraformVersion string
  ConfigureProviderData interface{}
}

func (r ResourceData) getRuntimeData() framework.RuntimeData {
  return r
}
```

That would let us get access to `RuntimeData` from an `Resource` interface fulfilled by `computeInstanceResource` by just calling `getRuntimeData()`, without the provider developer needing to know anything about it, implement any methods, or do anything other than embedding the `RuntimeData` struct in their type. It would also let us hide data we wouldn't want to expose to provider developers while maintaining access to it for the framework, which might include TerraformVersion.

Author: Yes, it does make sense to have this included here as well as in the runtime state doc - we can remove any excessive duplication later.

Reviewer: My mental model is that this document is about the tradeoff of structs and interfaces as providing structure to the framework, and the runtime data document is about the different ways we can inject that runtime data and what runtime data we want to inject, and what the tradeoffs of those options are.

Reviewer: I think there's a lot of overlap here, but I think there's some context that can be teased out on either end of this, potentially with some overlap.

Author: It seems a bit bizarre to have `TerraformVersion` be the concern of a `Resource`, since it doesn't vary from resource to resource within the same provider. Is there any other runtime state the resource could be concerned with which the framework will need to access?

I think the `TerraformVersion` example, but with `Provider` instead of `Resource`, can be instructive here in showing what would need to happen in provider code if the framework needed access to runtime data stored on a provider-defined `Provider` struct (i.e. something fulfilling a framework-defined `Provider` interface... speaking of confusing naming). I'll write this up. 

In your final code example, what is `ResourceData`? Do you mean `Resource`?

Reviewer: > It seems a bit bizarre to have `TerraformVersion` be the concern of a Resource, since it doesn't vary from resource to resource (instance) within the same provider. Is there any other runtime state the resource could be concerned with which the framework will need to access?

Agreed, but this is necessary because it [comes to us in the ConfigureProvider request](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/blob/e0e351efc90e60fa583afa6a2a2e3d8231f25e24/tfprotov6/provider.go#L140) and isn't anywhere in the [ApplyResourceChange request](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/blob/e0e351efc90e60fa583afa6a2a2e3d8231f25e24/tfprotov6/resource.go#L308-L359) meaning that if we want to include it in the User-Agent (which is why it exists), the framework is going to have to keep track of that state between the ConfigureProvider and ApplyResourceChange RPCs.

I think at the moment, that's the only framework-owned state. The API client produced by the ConfigureProvider RPC is the canonical example, but that's of a provider-defined type. But I think over time we'll continue to see information added that's framework-owned state (for example, I have proposals in mind to surface the provider address and version through ConfigureProvider RPC, etc.).

Whether that data gets embedded in a user-defined Provider type or a user-defined Resource type I think is an implementation detail that should be explored in the runtime data design doc. But the implementation doesn't materially change the way it interacts with the structs/interfaces decision being presented here.

> In your final code example, what is `ResourceData`? Do you mean `Resource`?

This is what I get for typing fast in GitHub comments. :D I mean `RuntimeData`, and have fixed it.

Reviewer: I think the crux of what I'm talking about here is "how does this choice impact how we smuggle data from the ConfigureProvider RPC into the CRUD functions?" and "how does this choice impact how we can automatically enrich helpers with information from the ConfigureProvider RPC, even when the helper is called within CRUD functions?"

Author: Thanks, this is an extremely helpful framing and I've aimed to summarise the core points in the expanded runtime state section.

In fulfilling an interface by creating instances of their own provider, resource, and data source struct types, provider developers have the **advantage** of more flexibility in their choice of fields within those structs, and whether they are used to store their own state.

> Allowing provider developers to define their own resource types, and construct them with a factory pattern, means that the type assertion on any `ProviderMeta` parameter need be done only once, in the factory itself. This is an **advantage**.

Reviewer: Similarly, it's mentioned in the Structs section above. I think this is likely a result of confusing/inaccurate feedback I gave in a previous review or in a conversation.

> Allowing provider developers to define their own resource types, and construct them with a factory pattern, means that the type assertion on any `ProviderMeta` parameter need be done only once, in the factory itself. This is an **advantage**.

Author: Thanks!

> For example, see the documentation for [`net/http#Server`](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Server).

### Compile-time checks

#### Structs

There is no check at compile time that a struct has non-nil values for every field.

For example, given the following struct:

```go
type Resource struct {
  Create func() error
}
```

And an instance `r` of that struct type:

```go
r := Resource{}
```

A runtime panic will occur due to nil pointer dereference if the SDK calls `r.Create()`. The SDK must check at runtime that struct functions are set appropriately, so developers do not get feedback at compile time if they have omitted a required function. This is a **disadvantage**.

On the other hand, a compile-time error will occur if a provider developer has made a typo and defined, for example, a `Craete` method instead of `Create`. This is an **advantage**.

#### Interfaces

Compile-time assertions can be made in provider code that a struct instance satisfies a particular interface. For example, the following resource must satisfy `framework.Resource` and the compiler will error if any method name has a typo:

```go

> type computeInstanceResource struct {
>   framework.Resource
> }

Reviewer: This would actually embed a `framework.Resource` type inside of `computeInstanceResource`. It would never cause a compilation error, as long as `framework.Resource` is a type that exists.

```suggestion
type computeInstanceResource struct {
}

var _ framework.Resource = computeInstanceResource{}
```

	Implementation        func(p ProviderState) ResourceImplementation
}

// ResourceImplementation defines the methods of this resource.
type ResourceImplementation interface {
	Create(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Read(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Update(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
	Destroy(context.Context) []*tfprotov5.Diagnostic
}
```

## Tradeoffs

### Runtime state

This section concerns stateful data generated during the lifecycle of the provider, not Terraform state.

For example, consider the `meta` parameter in the CRUD functions of [`helper/schema#Resource`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/schema#Resource), which is conventionally used by providers to store a configured API client. Since this data lives in a framework-owned type and not a provider-owned type, its type cannot be known at compile time and it is represented as `interface{}`. Its type must be asserted at the top of each CRUD method where it is used.

#### Structs

If providers, resources, and data sources are represented as structs in framework code, provider code will instantiate values of those structs. 

> Certain struct fields could be populated by the framework: for `Resource`, this could include `ProviderMeta` and `TerraformVersion`. Provider code cannot add additional struct fields to store strongly-typed data. This lack of flexibility is a **disadvantage**, although it likely also prevents some anti-patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain struct fields could be populated by the framework: for `Resource`, this could include the equivalent of SDKv2's `meta` value and `TerraformVersion`. Provider code cannot add additional struct fields to store strongly-typed data. This lack of flexibility is a **disadvantage**, although it likely also prevents some anti-patterns.
```

Just a suggestion. I think talking about `ProviderMeta` was a mistake on my part and I needlessly complicated everything, sorry.

```go
func NewProvider(data framework.RuntimeState) Provider {
  return provider{
    terraformVersion: data.TerraformVersion,
  }
}
```

or with explicit methods:

```go
type provider struct {
  framework.Provider
  terraformVersion string
}

func (p *provider) SetTerraformVersion(version string) {
  p.terraformVersion = version
}
```

However the provider-controlled struct is given this runtime state, helpers controlled by the framework need access to `terraformVersion`, so a getter is also required:

```go
func (p provider) GetTerraformVersion() string {
  return p.terraformVersion
}
```

This implementation burden on the provider code can be mitigated by providing a framework-controlled struct that providers are required to embed in their interface implementations. This can be enforced at compile time by requiring an unexported method to be implemented.

Framework code:
```go
type RuntimeData struct {
  terraformVersion string
  ConfigureProviderData interface{}
}

func (r RuntimeData) getRuntimeData() RuntimeData {
  return r
}
```

Provider code:
```go
type provider {
  framework.RuntimeData
}
```

> `ConfigureProviderData` here represents other runtime data supplied by the `ConfigureProvider` request. Please see the document on Runtime State for further discussion of what runtime data may be injected and the tradeoffs involved.

Reviewer: (I don't think this needs to be changed, but I just want to be clear about what I was intending: `ConfigureProviderData` in my example is a 1:1 mapping to `meta` in SDKv2. I think this comment should only result in a change if it changes your understanding of this paragraph. I think the paragraph is fine and accurate as-is, however.)
